Developing an OP2 Application
=============================

This page provides a tutorial in the basics of using OP2 for unstructured-mesh application development.

Example Application
-------------------

The tutorial will use the Airfoil application, a simple non-linear  2D  inviscid  airfoil code that uses an unstructured mesh. It is a finite volume application that solves the 2D Euler equations using a scalar numerical dissipation. The algorithm iterates towards the steady state solution, in each iteration using a control volume approach - for example the rate at which the mass changes within a control volume is equal to the net flux of mass into the control volume across the four faces around the cell.

Airfoil consists of five loops, ``save_soln`` , ``adt_calc`` , ``res_calc`` , ``bres_calc`` and ``update``, within a time-marching iterative loop. Out of these, ``save_soln`` and ``update`` are what we classify as direct loops where all the data accessed in the loop is defined on the mesh element over which the loop iterates over. Thus for example in a direct loop a loop over edges will only access data defined on edges. The other three loops are indirect loops. In this case when looping over a given type of elements, data on other types of elements will be accessed indirectly, using mapping tables. Thus for example ``res_calc`` iterates over edges and increments data on cells, accessing them indirectly via a mapping table that gives the explicit connectivity information between edges and cells.

The standard mesh size solved with Airfoil consists of 1.5M edges.  Here the most compute intensive loop is ``res_calc``, which is called 2000 times during the total execution of the application and performs about 100 floating-point operations per mesh edge.

* Go to the ``OP2/apps/c/airfoil/airfoil/airfoil_tutorial/original`` directory and open the ``airfoil_orig.cpp`` file to view the original application.
* Use the Makefile in the same directory to compile and then run the application. The ``new_grid.dat`` (downloadable from `here <https://op-dsl.github.io/docs/OP2/new_grid.dat>`__) needs to be present in the same directory as the executable.
* The program executes by reporting the rms value of the pressure held on the cells for every 100 iterations and ends by comparing this value to the reference value of the computation at 1000 iterations. If the solution is within machine precision of the reference value, the execution is considered to be validated (PASS). This is the same criteria required to validate any parallel versions of the application, including the paralleizations generated by OP2 as detailed below.


Original - Load mesh and initialization
---------------------------------------
The original code begins with allocating memory to hold the mesh data and then initializing them by reading in the mesh data, form the ``new_grid.dat`` text file:


.. code-block:: C

  FILE *fp;
  if ((fp = fopen(FILE_NAME_PATH, "r")) == NULL) {
    printf("can't open file FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
    exit(-1);
  }
  if (fscanf(fp, "%d %d %d %d \n", &nnode, &ncell, &nedge, &nbedge) != 4) {
	printf("error reading from FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
	exit(-1);
  }

  cell   = (int *)malloc(4 * ncell  * sizeof(int));
  edge   = (int *)malloc(2 * nedge  * sizeof(int));
  ecell  = (int *)malloc(2 * nedge  * sizeof(int));
  bedge  = (int *)malloc(2 * nbedge * sizeof(int));
  becell = (int *)malloc(1 * nbedge * sizeof(int));
  bound  = (int *)malloc(1 * nbedge * sizeof(int));
  x      = (double *)malloc(2 * nnode * sizeof(double));
  q      = (double *)malloc(4 * ncell * sizeof(double));
  qold   = (double *)malloc(4 * ncell * sizeof(double));
  res    = (double *)malloc(4 * ncell * sizeof(double));
  adt    = (double *)malloc(1 * ncell * sizeof(double));

  for (int n = 0; n < nnode; n++) {
	if (fscanf(fp, "%lf %lf \n", &x[2 * n], &x[2 * n + 1]) != 2) {
  	  printf("error reading from FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
  	  exit(-1);
	}
  }

  for (int n = 0; n < ncell; n++) {
    if (fscanf(fp, "%d %d %d %d \n", &cell[4 * n], &cell[4 * n + 1],
        &cell[4 * n + 2], &cell[4 * n + 3]) != 4) {
      printf("error reading from FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
      exit(-1);
    }
  }
  for (int n = 0; n < nedge; n++) {
	if (fscanf(fp, "%d %d %d %d \n", &edge[2 * n], &edge[2 * n + 1],
        &ecell[2 * n], &ecell[2 * n + 1]) != 4) {
      printf("error reading from FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
  	  exit(-1);
    }
  }
  for (int n = 0; n < nbedge; n++) {
    if (fscanf(fp, "%d %d %d %d \n", &bedge[2 * n], &bedge[2 * n + 1],
        &becell[n], &bound[n]) != 4) {
    printf("error reading from FILE_NAME_PATH\n");
    exit(-1);
    }
  }
  fclose(fp);


The code then initialize ``q`` and ``res`` data arrays to 0.

Original - Main iteration and loops over mesh
---------------------------------------------

The main iterative loop is a for loop that iterates for some ``NUM_ITERATIONS`` which in this case is set to 1000 iterations.  Within this main iterative loops there are 5 loops over various mesh elements (as noted above) including direct and indirect loops.


Build OP2
---------
Build OP2 using instructions in the `Getting Started <fhttps://op2-dsl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started.html>`__. page.

Step 1 - Preparing to use OP2
-----------------------------

First, include the following header files, then initialize OP2 and finalize it as follows:

.. code-block:: C

  #include "op_seq.h"
  ...
  ...
  int main(int argc, char **argv) {
    //Initialise the OP2 library, passing runtime args, and setting diagnostics level to low (1)
    op_init(argc, argv, 1);
    ...
    ...
    ...
    free(adt);
    free(res);

    //Finalising the OP2 library
    op_exit();
  }

By this point you need OP2 set up - take a look at the Makefile in step1, and observe that the include and library paths are added, and we link against ``op2_seq`` back-end library. Using the ``op_seq.h`` header file and linking with the sequential back-end OP2 lib produces what we call a *developer sequential* version of the application. This should be used to successively develop the rest of the application by using the OP2 API and validate its numerical output, as we do so in the next steps.


Step 2 - OP2 Declaration
------------------------

**Declare sets** - The Airfoil application consists of four mesh element types (which we call sets): nodes, edges, cells and boundary edges. These needs to be declared using the ``op_set`` API call together with the number of elements for each of these sets:

.. code-block:: C

  // declare sets
  op_set nodes  = op_decl_set(nnode,  "nodes" );
  op_set edges  = op_decl_set(nedge,  "edges" );
  op_set bedges = op_decl_set(nbedge, "bedges");
  op_set cells  = op_decl_set(ncell,  "cells" );

Later, we will see how the number of mesh elements can be read in directly from an hdf5 file using the ``op_set_hdf5`` call.

When developing your own application with OP2, or indeed converting an application to use OP2, you will need to decide on what mesh element types, i.e. sets will need to be declared to define the full mesh. A good starting point for this design is to see what mesh elements are used the loops over the mesh.

**Declare maps** - Looking at the original Airfoil application's loops we see that mappings between edges and nodes, edges and cells, boundary edges and nodes, boundary edges and cells, and cells and nodes are required. This can be observed by the indirect access to data in each of the loops in the main iteration loops. These connectivity information needs to be declared via the ``op_decl_map`` API call:

.. code-block:: C

  //declare maps
  op_map pedge   = op_decl_map(edges,  nodes, 2, edge,   "pedge"  );
  op_map pecell  = op_decl_map(edges,  cells, 2, ecell,  "pecell" );
  op_map pbedge  = op_decl_map(bedges, nodes, 2, bedge,  "pbedge" );
  op_map pbecell = op_decl_map(bedges, cells, 1, becell, "pbecell");
  op_map pcell   = op_decl_map(cells,  nodes, 4, cell,   "pcell"  );

The ``op_decl_map`` requires the names of the two sets for which the mapping is declared, its arity, mapping data (as in this case allocated in integer blocks of memory) and a string name.

**Declare data** - All data declared on sets should be declared using the ``op_decl_dat`` API call. For Airfoil this consists of the mesh coordinates data ``x``, new and old solution ``q`` and ``q_old``, area time step ``adt``, flux residual ``res`` and boundary flag ``bound`` that indicates if the edge is a boundary edge:

.. code-block:: C

  //declare data on sets
  op_dat p_bound = op_decl_dat(bedges, 1, "int",    bound, "p_bound");
  op_dat p_x     = op_decl_dat(nodes,  2, "double", x,     "p_x"    );
  op_dat p_q     = op_decl_dat(cells,  4, "double", q,     "p_q"    );
  op_dat p_qold  = op_decl_dat(cells,  4, "double", qold,  "p_qold" );
  op_dat p_adt   = op_decl_dat(cells,  1, "double", adt,   "p_adt"  );
  op_dat p_res   = op_decl_dat(cells,  4, "double", res,   "p_res"  );

**Declare constants** - Finally global constants that are used in any of the computations in the loops needs to be declared. This is required due to the fact that when using code-generation later for parallelizations such as on GPUs (e.g. using CUDA), global constants needs to be copied over to the GPUs before they can be used in a GPU kernel. Declaring them using the ``op_decl_const`` API call will indicate to the OP2 code-generator that these constants needs to be handled in a special way, generating code for copying them to the GPU for the relevant back-ends.

.. code-block:: C

  //declare global constants
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &gam  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &gm1  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &cfl  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &eps  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &alpha);
  op_decl_const(4, "double", qinf  );

Finally information about the the declared mesh can be viewed using a diagnostics level of 2 in ``op_init`` and calling ``op_diagnostic_output()`` API call:

.. code-block:: C

  /* main application */
  int main(int argc, char **argv) {
  //Initialise the OP2 library, passing runtime args, and setting diagnostics level to low (1)
  op_init(argc, argv, 2);
  ...
  ... op_decl_set ...
  ... op_decl_map ...
  ... op_decl_dat ...
  ... op_decl_const  ...
  ...
  //output mesh information
  op_diagnostic_output();

Finally compile the step2 application and execute. You will note that the full application still runs and validates as OP2, with the sequential back-end simply uses the allocated memory for sets, maps and data in the declaration, without internally de-allocating them. This helps the developer to gradually build up the application with the conversion to OP2 API (as we are do here), checking for validation on each step. However, this will only work for this developer sequential version, where none of the parallel versions generated via the code generator nor the code generated sequential version ``gen_seq`` will work as they de-allocate the initial memory and move the mesh to obtain best parallel performance.


Step 3 - First parallel loop : direct loop
------------------------------------------

We can now convert the first loop to use the OP2 API. In this case its a direct loop called ``save_soln`` that iterates over cells and saves the previous time-iteration's solution, ``q`` to ``q_old``:

.. code-block:: C

  //save_soln : iterates over cells
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < (ncell * 4); ++iteration) {
    qold[iteration] = q[iteration];
  }

This is a direct loops due to the fact that all data accessed in the computation are defined on the set that the loop iterates over. In this case the iteration set is cells.

To convert to the OP2 API we first outline the loop body (elemental kernel) to a subroutine:

.. code-block:: C

  //outlined elemental kernel
  inline void save_soln(double *q, double *qold) {
  for (int n = 0; n < 4; n++)
    qold[n] = q[n];
  }

  //save_soln : iterates over cells
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < (ncell * 4); ++iteration) {
    save_soln(&q[iteration], &qold[iteration]);
  }

Now we can directly declare the loop with the ``op_par_loop`` API call:

.. code-block:: C

  op_par_loop(save_soln, "save_soln", cells,
              op_arg_dat(p_q,    -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_qold, -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_WRITE));

Note how we have:

- indicated the elemental kernel ``save_soln`` in the first argument to ``op_par_loop``
- used the ``op_dat``s names ``p_q`` and ``p_qold`` in the API call
- noted the iteration set ``cells`` (3rd argument)
- indicated the direct access of ``q`` and ``q_old`` using ``OP_ID``
- indicated that ``p_q`` is read only (``OP_READ``) and ``q_old`` is written to only (``OP_WRITE``), by looking through the elemental kernel and identifying how they are used/accessed in the kernel.
- given that ``p_q`` is read only we also indicate this by the key word ``const`` for ``save-soln`` elemental kernel.
- The fourth argument of an ``op_arg_dat`` is the dimension of the data. For ``p_q`` and ``p_qold`` there are 4 doubles per mesh point.

Compile and execute the modified application (see code in ``../step3``) and check if the solution validates.

Step 4 - Indirect loops
-----------------------

The next loop in the application ``adt_calc`` calculate area/timstep and iterates over cells. In this case we see that the loop is an indirect loop where the data ``x`` on the four nodes connected to a cell is accessed indirectly via a cells to nodes mapping. Additionally data ``adt`` are accessed directly where ``adt`` is data on the cells:

.. code-block:: C

  //adt_calc - calculate area/timstep : iterates over cells
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < ncell; ++iteration) {
    int map1idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 0];
    int map2idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 1];
    int map3idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 2];
    int map4idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 3];

    double dx, dy, ri, u, v, c;

    ri = 1.0f / q[4 * iteration + 0];
    u = ri * q[4 * iteration + 1];
    v = ri * q[4 * iteration + 2];
    c = sqrt(gam * gm1 * (ri * q[4 * iteration + 3] - 0.5f * (u * u + v * v)));

    dx = x[2 * map2idx + 0] - x[2 * map1idx + 0];
    dy = x[2 * map2idx + 1] - x[2 * map1idx + 1];
    adt[iteration] = fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x[2 * map3idx + 0] - x[2 * map2idx + 0];
    dy = x[2 * map3idx + 1] - x[2 * map2idx + 1];
    adt[iteration] += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x[2 * map4idx + 0] - x[2 * map3idx + 0];
    dy = x[2 * map4idx + 1] - x[2 * map3idx + 1];
    adt[iteration] += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x[2 * map1idx + 0] - x[2 * map4idx + 0];
    dy = x[2 * map1idx + 1] - x[2 * map4idx + 1];
    adt[iteration] += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    adt[iteration] = (adt[iteration]) / cfl;
  }

Similar to the direct loop, we outline the loop body and call it within the loop as follows:

.. code-block:: C

  //outlined elemental kernel - adt_calc
  inline void adt_calc(double *x1, double *x2, double *x3,
                       double *x4, double *q, double *adt) {
    double dx, dy, ri, u, v, c;

    ri = 1.0f / q[0];
    u = ri * q[1];
    v = ri * q[2];
    c = sqrt(gam * gm1 * (ri * q[3] - 0.5f * (u * u + v * v)));

    dx = x2[0] - x1[0];
    dy = x2[1] - x1[1];
    *adt = fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x3[0] - x2[0];
    dy = x3[1] - x2[1];
    *adt += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x4[0] - x3[0];
    dy = x4[1] - x3[1];
    *adt += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    dx = x1[0] - x4[0];
    dy = x1[1] - x4[1];
    *adt += fabs(u * dy - v * dx) + c * sqrt(dx * dx + dy * dy);

    *adt = (*adt) / cfl;
  }

  //adt_calc - calculate area/timstep : iterates over cells
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < ncell; ++iteration) {
    int map1idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 0];
    int map2idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 1];
    int map3idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 2];
    int map4idx = cell[iteration * 4 + 3];

    adt_calc(&x[2 * map1idx], &x[2 * map2idx], &x[2 * map3idx],
             &x[2 * map4idx], &q[4 * iteration], &adt[iteration]);
  }

Now, convert the loop to use the ``op_par_loop`` API:

.. code-block:: C

  //res_calc - calculate flux residual: iterates over edges
  op_par_loop(adt_calc, "adt_calc", cells,
              op_arg_dat(p_x,   0, pcell, 2, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_x,   1, pcell, 2, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_x,   2, pcell, 2, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_x,   3, pcell, 2, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_q,  -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_adt,-1, OP_ID, 1, "double", OP_WRITE));

Note in this case how the indirections are specified using the mapping declared as OP2 map ``pcell``, indicating the to-set index (2nd argument), and access mode ``OP_READ``.


Step 5 - Global reductions
--------------------------

At this stage almost all the remaining loops can be converted to the OP2 API. Only the final loop `update` that updates the flow field needs special handling due to its global reduction:

.. code-block:: C

  rms = 0.0f;
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < ncell; ++iteration) {
    double del, adti;

    adti = 1.0f / (adt[iteration]);

    for (int n = 0; n < 4; n++) {
      del = adti * res[iteration * 4 + n];
      q[iteration * 4 + n] = qold[iteration * 4 + n] - del;
      res[iteration * 4 + n] = 0.0f;
      rms += del * del;
    }
  }

Here, the global variable ``rms`` is used as a reduction variable to compute the rms value of the residual. The kernel can be outlined as follows:

.. code-block:: C

  //outlined elemental kernel - update
  inline void update(double *qold, double *q, double *res,
                     double *adt, double *rms) {
    double del, adti;

    adti = 1.0f / (*adt);

    for (int n = 0; n < 4; n++) {
      del = adti * res[n];
      q[n] = qold[n] - del;
      res[n] = 0.0f;
      *rms += del * del;
    }
  }

And then call it in the application:

.. code-block:: C

  //update = update flow field - iterates over cells
  rms = 0.0f;
  for (int iteration = 0; iteration < ncell; ++iteration) {
    update(&qold[iteration * 4], &q[iteration * 4], &res[iteration * 4],
           &adt[iteration], &rms);
  }

The global reduction requires the ``op_arg_gbl`` API call with ``OP_INC`` access mode to indicate that the variable is a global reduction:

.. code-block:: C

  //update = update flow field - iterates over cells
  rms = 0.0f;
  op_par_loop(update, "update", cells,
              op_arg_dat(p_qold, -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_dat(p_q,    -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_WRITE),
              op_arg_dat(p_res,  -1, OP_ID, 4, "double", OP_RW   ),
              op_arg_dat(p_adt,  -1, OP_ID, 1, "double", OP_READ ),
              op_arg_gbl(&rms,    1,           "double", OP_INC  ));

At this point all the loops have been converted to use ``op_par_loop`` API and the application should be validating when executed on as sequential, single threaded CPU application.

Step 6 - Handing it all to OP2
--------------------------------------

Once the developer sequential version has been created and the numerical output validates the application can be prepared to obtain a developer distributed memory parallel version. This step can be completed to obtain a parallel executable, without code-generation if the following steps are implemented.

(1) File I/O needs to be extended to allow distributed memory execution with MPI. The current Airfoil application simply reads the mesh data from a text file and such a simple setup will not be workable on a distributed memory system, such as a cluster and more importantly will not be scalable with MPI. The simplest solution is to use OP2's HDF5 API for declaring the mesh by replacing ``op_decl_set, op_decl_map, op_decl_dat`` and ``op_decl_const`` by its HDF5 counterparts as follows:

.. code-block:: C

  // declare sets
  op_set nodes  = op_decl_set_hdf5(file,  "nodes" );
  op_set edges  = op_decl_set_hdf5(file,  "edges" );
  op_set bedges = op_decl_set_hdf5(file, "bedges");
  op_set cells  = op_decl_set_hdf5(file,  "cells" );

  //declare maps
  op_map pedge   = op_decl_map_hdf5(edges,  nodes, 2, file, "pedge"  );
  op_map pecell  = op_decl_map_hdf5(edges,  cells, 2, file, "pecell" );
  op_map pbedge  = op_decl_map_hdf5(bedges, nodes, 2, file, "pbedge" );
  op_map pbecell = op_decl_map_hdf5(bedges, cells, 1, file, "pbecell");
  op_map pcell   = op_decl_map_hdf5(cells,  nodes, 4, file, "pcell"  );

  //declare data on sets
  op_dat p_bound = op_decl_dat_hdf5(bedges, 1, "int",    file, "p_bound");
  op_dat p_x     = op_decl_dat_hdf5(nodes,  2, "double", file, "p_x"    );
  op_dat p_q     = op_decl_dat_hdf5(cells,  4, "double", file, "p_q"    );
  op_dat p_qold  = op_decl_dat_hdf5(cells,  4, "double", file, "p_qold" );
  op_dat p_adt   = op_decl_dat_hdf5(cells,  1, "double", file, "p_adt"  );
  op_dat p_res   = op_decl_dat_hdf5(cells,  4, "double", file, "p_res"  );

  //read and declare global constants
  op_get_const_hdf5("gam",   1, "double", (char *)&gam,  file);
  op_get_const_hdf5("gm1",   1, "double", (char *)&gm1,  file);
  op_get_const_hdf5("cfl",   1, "double", (char *)&cfl,  file);
  op_get_const_hdf5("eps",   1, "double", (char *)&eps,  file);
  op_get_const_hdf5("alpha", 1, "double", (char *)&alpha,file);
  op_get_const_hdf5("qinf",  4, "double", (char *)&qinf, file);

  op_decl_const(1, "double", &gam  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &gm1  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &cfl  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &eps  );
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &alpha);
  op_decl_const(4, "double", qinf  );

Note here that we assume that the mesh is already available as an HDF5 file named ``new_grid.h5``. (See the ``convert_mesh.cpp`` utility application in ``OP2-Common/apps/c/airfoil/airfoil_hdf5/dp`` to understand how we can create an HDF5 file to be compatible with the OP2 API for Airfoil starting from mesh data defined in a text file.)

When the application has been switched to use the HDF5 API calls, manually allocated memory for the mesh elements can be removed. Additionally all ``printf`` statements should use ``op_printf`` so that output to terminal will only be done by the ROOT mpi process. We can also replace the timer routines with OP2's ``op_timers`` which times the execution of the code the ROOT.

Given that the mesh was read via HDF5, to obtain the global sizes of the mesh, OP2's ``op_get_size()`` API call need to be used. This is required for the Airfoil application to obtain the number of cells to compute the rms value for every 100 iterations to validate the application:

.. code-block:: C

  //get global number of cells
  ncell = op_get_size(cells);


(2) Add the OP2 partitioner call ``op_partition`` to the code in order to signal to the MPI back-end, the point in the program that all mesh data have been defined and mesh can be partitioned and MPI halos can be created:

.. code-block:: C

  ...
  ...
  op_decl_const(1, "double", &alpha);
  op_decl_const(4, "double", qinf  );

  //output mesh information
  op_diagnostic_output();

  //partition mesh and create mpi halos
  op_partition("BLOCK", "ANY", edges, pecell, p_x);

  ...
  ...

See the API documentation for practitioner options. In this case no special partitioner is used leaving the initial block partitioning of data at the time of file I/O through HDF5.

Take a look at the code in the ``/step6`` for the full code changes done to the Airfoil application. The application can  now be compiled to obtain a developer distributed-memory (MPI) parallel executable using the Makefile in the same directory. Note how the executable is created by linking with the OP2 MPI back-end, ``libop2_mpi`` together with the HDF5 library ``libhdf5``. You will need to have had HDF5 library installed on your system to carry out this step.

The resulting executable is called a ``developer MPI`` version of the application, which should again be used to verify validity of the application by running with ``mpirun`` in the usual way of executing an MPI application.

.. * details on ``op_fetch_data`` call


Step 7 - Code generation
------------------------

Now that both the sequential and MPI developer versions work and validate, its time to generate other parallel versions. However, first we should move the elemental kernels to header files so that after the code generation the modified main application will not have the same elemental kernel definitions. This is currently a limitation of the code-generator, which will be remedied in future versions.

We move the elemental kernels to header files, each with the name of the kernel and include them in the ``airfoil_step7.cpp`` main file:

.. code-block:: C

  //
  // kernel routines for parallel loops
  //
  #include "adt_calc.h"
  #include "bres_calc.h"
  #include "res_calc.h"
  #include "save_soln.h"
  #include "update.h"

Now the code is ready for code-generation, go to the ``/step7`` directory and on the terminal type :

``python $OP2_INSTALL_PATH/../translator/c/op2.py airfoil_step7.cpp``

Note that the ``python`` command assumes that it will point to Python 3.* or above. This will then generate (in the same directory) parallel code under sub-directories - ``cuda, openacc, openmp,  openmp4, seq`` and  ``vec``. They correspond to on-node parallel version based on CUDA, OpenACC, OpenMP, OpenMP4.0 (and higher) and SIMD vectorized, respectively. Each of them can also run in combination with distributed memory parallelization using MPI across nodes.

The Makefile in ``/step7`` simply uses the OP2 supplied makefiles:

.. code-block:: make

  APP_NAME := airfoil_step7

  APP_ENTRY := $(APP_NAME).cpp
  APP_ENTRY_MPI := $(APP_ENTRY)

  OP2_LIBS_WITH_HDF5 := true

  include ../../../../../makefiles/common.mk
  include ../../../../../makefiles/c_app.mk


This will build all the currently supported parallel versions, provided that the supporting libraries are available on your system and the relevant OP2 back-end libraries have been built.

Final - Code generated versions and execution
---------------------------------------------

The following parallel versions will be generated from the code generator and can be executed as follows (see ``/final`` directory for all the generated code) :

* Developer sequential and developer mpi



* code-gen sequential
* MPI + code-gen sequential



Optimizations
-------------

See the :ref:`perf` section for a number of specific compile-time and runtime flags to obtain better performance.
